So we spent a lot of time on the grid,
time to again use it in our project and then to conclude this module. I want to use the grid on our form
here,
so on the start hosting form because we can actually organize this form as a grid
and that's exactly what I want to do.
What I want to do precisely is on bigger screens like this one, so on not mobile modes,
I want to position my labels and the form inputs next to each other. On mobile screens,
I essentially want to position them as they currently are positioned. Now for that, I'll use the grid
and since we will see more on the desktop view, I'll actually start with the desktop related styles
but we will also adjust this to be working mobile first throughout this module or throughout the next lectures
to be precise.
So what can we do?
One thing I want to do is, on my start hosting, start-hosting.css file,
the sign-up form here, I'll turn this into a grid, display grid.
This will be relevant or this should be applied for both mobile and desktop views, so I don't need to
put this into a media query.
This also has one interesting implication, if we reload,
nothing changes because the elements, the child elements are automatically put into the rows which
are created automatically.
You can see that we do have a grid here though if you click on that and the other interesting thing you can
see here in the developer tools already is this page now actually has two grids;
the body grid which is the header, main area and footer and this form grid and they are kind of nested
into each other.
The body holds the main element as one element, so this is added to one row of the body grid and the
main grid on the other hand holds the form grid and that is absolutely fine,
you can nest grids into each other just as you can add flex containers into a grid and the other way
around.
So we got a nested grid so to say, it's still a regular grid on my form here and this is essentially
the look I want to have on a mobile phone, so we probably don't need to change that much about that
but let's work on the desktop mode now,
what can we change there?
For that I'll go into my media query at the bottom because that is where I'll need to change things and I
want you to define two columns there for my form because I want to position labels and inputs next to
each other as I just said.
So we add two columns with grid template columns and now the first column for the label maybe should
be 10rem and the other one should be auto and just be as wide as required.
If I now reload,
now we have the elements sit next to each other.
Now maybe this is a bit too small, so let's increase the width of the sign-up form to 30rem here,
that looks better.
So now we're already taking advantage of the grid
and you can see how super easy and simple this is. Now with the grid added,
we can also change the way we put distance between these elements.
Right now, we do this with margins,
for example on the button, we can get rid of that and we can also get rid of the other margins
we have,
like here on sign-up form labels, inputs and selects. With this if I save this and reload,
there is no distance between the elements but you know how you can put distance between your rows,
you add a grid gap. So we can add a grid row gap
here of let's say 1rem.
If I reload, now there is some distance in-between
again. You could also add one between the columns, so a grid column gap or the shorthand of course, of maybe
.5rem,
now we can also see that there is a little bit of distance between the labels and the inputs.
Now if we want to ensure that the checkbox and its label are still closer next to each other,
one thing we can simply do is go to the index.html file and scroll down to the checkbox
and here where we have the checkbox and our checkbox label, we can wrap this into a div, a div where we
assign a class of maybe sign-up form checkbox
and now we put both elements into there.
Now if we save that, one problem we'll face is that it's squeezed into one cell and the button takes the
cell next to it.
Obviously, this is not the style we want and we can easily change it
by adding a class of sign-up form checkbox, so this is the selector selecting the div we just added
and giving it a grid column of span 2, so that this actually takes two cells.
If we now reload, this is again taking two cells, therefore the button is below it
and now we can see that this looks much nicer again.
Now one other thing I want to do real quick here, just to practice the grid a bit more or maybe something
for you to practice it,
make sure that this dropdown actually goes in the second row, so that in the first row we just have the
title label,
second row should just be the dropdown and thereafter, you have the other form as it looks right now. Here's
your chance to pause the video, thereafter we'll do this together.
Were you successful?
Let's try it out.
So we want to put the label into one line and the dropdown into the line below it.
Well one easy way of doing that of course is that we simply select the dropdown element here and assign
it a row explicitly instead of letting the grid auto populate itself.
We can select that dropdown here, so in this select element in a couple of different ways, for example
by using the select tag collector or by using the ID attribute selector
and I'll use that, just to again practice this.
So let's use our sign-up form and in there, select any element which has the ID attribute which
in this case should be title because it has an ID of title.
So let's select this, this should give us access to the dropdown
and now I want to move that into row number two as I said and now obviously we can do this by saying that
we want to put it into a row which comes after line 2 and then span 1 is the default.
We could also say up to row 3 but we can omit this
and now if we reload, this is there but now the first name jumps into the cell which was previously occupied
by the dropdown
and the reason for this is that we explicitly assigned a new cell to this dropdown
and as I said, this will then not lead to the DOM order being respected,
instead the element after it takes its place because this has kind of taken out of the document flow
you could say.
Now one way around this is that we simply instead of giving it a clearly defined row, we tell it that
it should span two cells on the columns.
This will now ensure that this place it previously had is not taken because this element is now not
taken out of the document flow,
it just is broader
and that's exactly the use case
we practiced a few minutes ago in the theory project.
Now we got this positioned in the way we want it positioned,
let's now check the mobile view. Now on the mobile view, this looks pretty good already
because if we go back to our sign-up form here where we set display grid, this obviously leads to all
the elements being put into some default rows.
The only thing I want to do here is I want to set grid auto rows to maybe 2rem.
Now if we reload, all the rows are equally high which is a bit nicer in my opinion
and maybe we also add a gap here,
a grid row gap of .5rem between the rows,
so there's a little bit more distance between the rows.
With that, we got a nice mobile mode in my opinion,
this looks all right and we got a nice desktop mode.
Now one thing we can notice on very small devices, down there we have a little bit of an issue with the
check box and the sign-up button,
this won't actually be an issue though because I'm just zoomed in, so this would actually be a super
small device and we shouldn't run into issues there.
If you want to get rid of this too, if you want to support calculators, then you can simply decrease the
font size of your labels and you'll be fine again,
you can use a normal media query for that.
So that's not a grid issue
and on any realistic device, this looks good
anyways. So I'm happy with that,
we did add the grid and with that we reformated the form and this shows another use case of the grid
besides generating a general page layout with header, footer and so on,
now we're using it for a form,
also a very nice way of using the grid.